Add WSL2 instructions (#807)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/supervisor/development.md

:::

It is assumed at this point you have installed Debian from the Microsoft Store and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download). From within your WSL2-enabled Debian terminal, run the following annotated bash script. If you copy the entire script it should perform the required setup of Debian for Home Assistant development but any problems may be difficult to troubleshoot, so it is recommended to run this line-by-line.

```bash
apt update; apt install -y curl wget git gnupg; #Update and install our dependencies
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/creationix/nvm/master/install.sh | bash; #Install NVM
source ~/.profile; nvm install node; #reload profile and install node
sudo apt remove cmdtest yarn  #Remove problematic packages if installed. Debian current Yarn does not work.
curl -sS https://dl.yarnpkg.com/debian/pubkey.gpg | sudo apt-key add -  #Add yarn repo certificate
echo "deb https://dl.yarnpkg.com/debian/ stable main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/yarn.list #Add Yarn repo
sudo apt update; sudo apt install yarn -y; #Install yarn

> curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com |sudo bash  #install docker Community Edition

Reviewer: This looks weird. Why is docker installed inside wsl. Any docker instance on windows is fully accessable from inside wsl instances.

It should be installed the official way in windows. Can you explain why that does not work?

Ps. Never done any supervisor development, so i might miss something.

Author: So that you can use the command line tools.

Reviewer: Docker works inside wsl2 by default. Standard desktop install will inject the cli commands into your wsl2 images

Author: This is a new feature. Will verify if this is the case with Rancher Desktop.  I shouldn't recommend installing Docker Desktop.  https://www.suse.com/c/rancher_blog/using-rancher-desktop-for-local-kubernetes-development/#:~:text=Unlike%20Docker%E2%80%99s%20product%2C%20however%2C%20Rancher%20Desktop%20is%20a%20free%20and%20open%20source%20solution%20developed%20by%20SUSE

Author: Sure enough.  Good catch!  I created a new instance of Ubuntu Preview and enabled in  Settings->WSL->Integrations.  Docker was running immediately.  I can work with this.

![image](https://github.com/home-assistant/developers.home-assistant/assets/527919/a30ab97c-4f49-4646-ac9d-af3b90e4cd65)

Will get the system operational with this new guidance.  But probably this weekend.

sudo update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy #Fix IP Tables for Docker
git clone https://github.com/home-assistant/supervisor /home/$USER/supervisor #Clone Supervisor to ~/supervisor
usermod -aG docker $USER #Add self to docker group
systemctl enable docker.service #enable docker start on boot
service docker start #Start the docker service
service docker status #Verify docker status is running
```

Restart your Debian terminal to activate the new profiles and software configurations. 

:::tip
Always run scripts line by line to figure out where the problem lies. If you need to completely start over, you can uninstall the Debian app, then from the Windows command prompt execute `del %HOMEPATH%\AppData\Roaming\Code`. After removing your VSCode settings, launch VS Code, and remove all extensions. Finally either execute `net stop LxssManager` from an administrative `cmd` prompt or reboot your computer and try again.

> :::

Reviewer: This looks like a really brute force kill all your setting approach. This will break other things in your system. I really don't want to promote such actions.

Author: What do you recommend?

Reviewer: breaking peoples vscode setups is not acceptable.

Now you're ready to run Yarn and Node. We must set up Docker communications and launch Visual Studio Code. The following commands will need to be run after each reboot/restart to link Docker to your WSL instance and launch Visual Studio Code.

```bash
sudo mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo mount -t cgroup -o none,name=systemd cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo service docker start
code

> ```

Reviewer: If stuff like this is needed, this instruction should really not use the standard wsl instance since it will break normal wsl uses.

Author: This was required for wsl1

Author: Planning to do an integration coming soon. I'll be able to update for WSL 2

If you need to rebuild the base of the Supervisor run the task "Build Supervisor" and then restart the "Run Supervisor" task again when that completes.

> #### Using Windows WSL2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Using Windows WSL2

```

> While the system is Linux and compatible with Mac, it is also possible to build and test locally on Windows using WSL2 with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS and other similar distros. This is achieved via WSL2, which makes POSIX tasks possible within Windows via system-level integration with a Linux virtual machine. 

Reviewer 2: There are some known issues with Ubuntu and Supervisor based installations. I wonder why to use Ubuntu in this case, while Debian is available as well. Is there a specific reason for that?

```suggestion
While the system is Linux and compatible with Mac, it is also possible to build and test locally on Windows using WSL2 with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS and other similar distros. This is achieved via WSL2, which makes POSIX tasks possible within Windows via system-level integration with a Linux virtual machine.
```

Reviewer 2: Unresolving, as there was an additional question in this comment.

Author: Was not aware of that.  I always choose Ubuntu for WSL as they are a user-friendly build and were the first by months to release a WSL package.  

Let's draft this for a bit.  I'll work on some other base.

Ubuntu is Debian-based.  Is there another option besides debian?

:::info

> You must use WSL2. WSL is not capable of running docker, and therefore is incompatibile.  If using this WSL method, you must ensure you [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You must use WSL2. WSL is not capable of running docker and therefore is incompatible. If using this WSL method, you must ensure you [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
```

:::

From within your WSL2-enabled Ubuntu-20.04 terminal, install Docker.io package. 
```bash

> sudo apt-get install docker.io

Reviewer 2: Don't use `docker.io`, instead use Docker CE provided by the Docker project.

Author: That [requires extensive setup](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/), I'd like to ask why do you prefer the Docker CE package over the built-in package repository docker.io package?

Reviewer 2: We had a lot of problems with the Docker.io packages, hence we only support and actively recommend the official Docker CE packages from Docker themselves.

<https://github.com/home-assistant/architecture/blob/master/adr/0014-home-assistant-supervised.md#supported-operating-system-system-dependencies-and-versions>

Reviewer 2: PS: They offer a 2 line method, not sure if that works on WSL

```bash
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
sudo sh get-docker.sh
```

Author: Note to future self: Debian instructions  https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/debian/

Author: Note to future self: 
run `sudo update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy`
within WSL:Debian reinstall
- Docker

Author: Note to future self:
Clean and Build instructions:
``` bash
docker rm $(docker ps -a -q)
docker system prune -a
```
F1: Tasks: Run Tasks-> Update Supervisor Panel
F1: Tasks: Run Tasks-> Run Supervisor

```

> Setting up a control group, and mounting the control group to a location which can be accessed via Linux.  The final command will setup and launch Visual Studio Code within Windows, with WSL2-enabled compatibility, thus enabling Supervisor development on Windows. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting up a control group, and mounting the control group to a location that can be accessed via Linux. The final command will set up and launch Visual Studio Code within Windows, with WSL2-enabled compatibility, thus enabling Supervisor development on Windows.
```

```bash
sudo mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo mount -t cgroup -o none,name=systemd cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
code
```

> You can now open your project as usual, or use the `/mnt/c/<path-to-your-project>` format, replacing `<path-to-your-project>` with the full path to your project, after removing `C:\`.  eg. `C:\Users\example\project` becomes `/mnt/c/example/project`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

You can now open your project as usual, or use the `/mnt/c/<path-to-your-project>` format, replacing `<path-to-your-project>` with the full path to your project, after removing `C:\`.  eg. `C:\Users\example\project` becomes `/mnt/c/example/project`.
```

#### Using Windows WSL2

While the system is Linux and compatible with Mac, it is also possible to build and test locally on Windows using WSL2 with Ubuntu 20.04 LTS and other similar distros. This is achieved via WSL2, which makes POSIX tasks possible within Windows via system-level integration with a Linux virtual machine.
:::info
You must use WSL2. WSL is not capable of running docker and therefore is incompatible. If using this WSL method, you must ensure you [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
:::

From within your WSL2-enabled Ubuntu-20.04 terminal, install Docker.io package. 
```bash
sudo apt-get install docker.io
```

Setting up a control group, and mounting the control group to a location that can be accessed via Linux. The final command will set up and launch Visual Studio Code within Windows, with WSL2-enabled compatibility, thus enabling Supervisor development on Windows.

```bash
sudo mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo mount -t cgroup -o none,name=systemd cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
code
```

> You can now open your project as usual, or use the `/mnt/c/<path-to-your-project>` format, replacing `<path-to-your-project>` with the full path to your project, after removing `C:\`.  eg. `C:\Users\example\project` becomes `/mnt/c/example/project`.

Reviewer 3: This assumes the project resides on the C drive. Given all local drives are mounted, `/mnt/<drive>/<path-to-project>` might be better.

Author: Correct. fixed.

#### Using Windows WSL2

While the system is Linux and compatible with Mac, it is also possible to build and test locally on Windows using WSL2 with Debian and other similar distros. This is achieved via Windows Subsystem for Linux 2 (WSL2), which makes POSIX tasks possible within Windows via system-level integration with a Linux virtual machine.

:::tip
You must use WSL2. WSL version 1 is not capable of running Docker and therefore is incompatible. If using this method, you must ensure you have [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
:::

It is assumed at this point you have installed Debian from the Microsoft Store and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download). From within your WSL2-enabled Debian terminal, run the following annotated bash script. If you copy the entire script it should perform the required setup of Debian for Home Assistant development but any problems may be difficult to troubleshoot, so it is recommended to run this line-by-line.

```bash
apt update; apt install -y curl wget git gnupg; #Update and install our dependencies

> curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/creationix/nvm/master/install.sh | bash; #Install NVM

Author: The URL is the always-up-to-date version.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/527919/182047157-a86ca7ef-28e8-475c-9563-d51fb26d7538.png)

sudo apt update; sudo apt install yarn -y; #Install yarn
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com |sudo bash  #install docker Community Edition
sudo update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy #Fix IP Tables for Docker
git clone https://github.com/home-assistant/supervisor /home/$USER/supervisor #Clone Supervisor to ~/supervisor
usermod -aG docker $USER #Add self to docker group
systemctl enable docker.service #enable docker start on boot
service docker start #Start the docker service
service docker status #Verify docker status is running
```

Restart your Debian terminal to activate the new profiles and software configurations. 

:::tip
Always run scripts line by line to figure out where the problem lies. If you need to completely start over, you can uninstall the Debian app, then from the Windows command prompt execute `del %HOMEPATH%\AppData\Roaming\Code`. After removing your VSCode settings, launch VS Code, and remove all extensions. Finally either execute `net stop LxssManager` from an administrative `cmd` prompt or reboot your computer and try again.
:::

> Now you're ready to run Yarn and Node. We must set up Docker communications and launch Visual Studio Code. The following commands will need to be run after each reboot/restart to link Docker to your WSL instance and launch Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer 4: I'd probably go for Docker Desktop for Windows here instead since it just works; and note that you should verify you're not required to pay Docker (which I expect applies to 99.9% of people following these instructions).

Author: I'm not sure Docker Desktop is preferred here.   Docker desktop is a tiered subscription, personal, team, pro, or business.   There's licensing involved here.  Regardless, Docker Desktop MAY be used, but a docker MUST be installed within WSL in order to use the WSL container and communicate with the docker running in another WSL container.

Reviewer 5: I would say Docker Desktop is preferred unless the user knows better.

If the user is running Windows to begin with, then it's likely the user will find it easier to install and setup Docker Desktop. Otherwise the user is most likely running commands that he doesn't understand in a linux prompt and it will make troubleshooting docker more troublesome.

Author: @frenck explicitly forbids Docker.io due to licensing in other comments here. Docker Desktop would fall into the same category.

Reviewer 6: Rancher Desktop from SUSE is an open source (Apache 2.0) alternative.

If you need to rebuild the base of the Supervisor run the task "Build Supervisor" and then restart the "Run Supervisor" task again when that completes.

#### Using Windows WSL2

While the system is Linux and compatible with Mac, it is also possible to build and test locally on Windows using WSL2 with Debian and other similar distros. This is achieved via Windows Subsystem for Linux 2 (WSL2), which makes POSIX tasks possible within Windows via system-level integration with a Linux virtual machine.

> :::tip
> You must use WSL2. WSL version 1 is not capable of running docker and therefore is incompatible. If using this method, you must ensure you have [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:::tip
You must use WSL2. WSL version 1 is not capable of running Docker and therefore is incompatible. If using this method, you must ensure you have [set up WSL2](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
:::
```

> It is assumed at this point you have installed Debian from the Microsoft Store and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download). From within your WSL2-enabled Debian terminal, run the following annotated bash script, line-by-line.  If you copy the entire script it will perform the required setup of Debian for Home Assitant development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is assumed at this point you have installed Debian from the Microsoft Store and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download). From within your WSL2-enabled Debian terminal, run the following annotated bash script, line-by-line. If you copy the entire script it will perform the required setup of Debian for Home Assitant development.
```

```bash

> sudo bash << EOF

Reviewer 2: Why is this wrapped?

We can just provide normal line-by-line instructions.

Author: Unwrapped.

set -e #Stop on any error to make it easier to figure out what went wrong
apt update; apt install -y curl wget git gnupg; #Update and install our dependencies
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/creationix/nvm/master/install.sh | bash; #Install NVM
source ~/.profile; nvm install node; #reload profile and install node
sudo apt remove cmdtest yarn  #Remove problematic packages if installed. Debian current Yarn does not work.
curl -sS https://dl.yarnpkg.com/debian/pubkey.gpg | sudo apt-key add -  #Add yarn repo certificate
echo "deb https://dl.yarnpkg.com/debian/ stable main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/yarn.list #Add Yarn repo
sudo apt update; sudo apt install yarn -y; #Install yarn
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com |sudo bash  #install docker Community Edition
sudo update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy #Fix IP Tables for Docker
git clone https://github.com/home-assistant/supervisor /home/$USER/supervisor #Clone Supervisor to ~/supervisor
chown $USER:$USER /home/$USER/supervisor
usermod -aG docker $USER
systemctl enable docker.service
service docker start
sleep 5
service docker status

> EOF
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EOF
```

Author: un EOF'd

```

> Restart your Debian terminal to activate the new profiles and software configurations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Restart your Debian terminal to activate the new profiles and software configurations. 
```

:::tip

> If a problem occurs with an automated script, always run it line by line to figure out where the problem lies.  In this case, skip the first line to directly execute each command.  If you need to completely start over, you can uninstall the Debian app, then from the Windows command prompt execute `del %HOMEPATH%\AppData\Roaming\Code`. After removing your VSCode settings, launch VS Code, and remove all extensions.  Finally reboot your computer and try again. 

Reviewer 2: The line by line should be the general script, so this text needs adjusting.

```suggestion
If a problem occurs with an automated script, always run it line by line to figure out where the problem lies. In this case, skip the first line to directly execute each command. If you need to completely start over, you can uninstall the Debian app, then from the Windows command prompt execute `del %HOMEPATH%\AppData\Roaming\Code`. After removing your VSCode settings, launch VS Code, and remove all extensions. Finally, reboot your computer and try again. 
```

:::

> Now you're ready to run Yarn and Node.  We must set up docker communications and launch Visual Studio Code.  The following commands will need to be run after each reboot to link docker to your WSL instance and launch Visual Studio Code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you're ready to run Yarn and Node. We must set up Docker communications and launch Visual Studio Code. The following commands will need to be run after each reboot to link Docker to your WSL instance and launch Visual Studio Code.
```

```bash
sudo mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo mount -t cgroup -o none,name=systemd cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
sudo service docker start
code
```

> Visual Studio Code will launch.  If the `code` command does not launch Visual Studio Code, relaunch the Debian terminal, or reboot your computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Visual Studio Code will launch. If the `code` command does not launch Visual Studio Code, relaunch the Debian terminal, or reboot your computer.
```

(PS: Reboot your computer? Windows really hasn't changed in all those years, hasn't it 😁 )

> 1. Click the Extensions icon on the left -> search -> type "remote" then install "Remote - WSL", and "Remote - Containers"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click the Extensions icon on the left -> search -> type "remote" then install "Remote - WSL", and "Remote - Containers".
```

2. Close Visual Studio Code and reopen with `code` command from Debian.

> 3. Observe "WSL: Debian" in the lower left corner.  If you do not see "WSL", then close folders and Debian, then relaunch Debian and re-run `code`.  if this problem persists, click the green "open a remote window" button in the lower left -> Remote WSL: New Window Using Distro -> Debian.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Observe "WSL: Debian" in the lower-left corner. If you do not see "WSL", then close folders and Debian, then relaunch Debian and re-run `code`. If this problem persists, click the green "open a remote window" button in the lower-left -> Remote WSL: New Window Using Distro -> Debian.
```

> 4. Click File->Open Folder-> type `~/supervisor`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Click File -> Open Folder -> type `~/supervisor`.
```

> 5. Visual Studio Code will offer to reopen in Dev Container after it has loaded Supervisor. When offered Dev Container in the lower right corner, click to open dev container.  If you were not presented this option, verify extensions are installed then close Visual Studio Code and reopen with the `code` command in Debian. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Visual Studio Code will offer to reopen in Dev Container after it has loaded Supervisor. When offered Dev Container in the lower right corner, click to open dev container. If you were not presented with this option, verify extensions are installed then close Visual Studio Code and reopen with the `code` command in Debian.
```

:::note

> When working in Dev Container, you will see "Dev Container: Supervisor dev" in the lower left corner of Visual Studio Code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When working in Dev Container, you will see "Dev Container: Supervisor dev" in the lower-left corner of Visual Studio Code. 
```

:::

> 7. Press F1, select Tasks: Run Task, and Update Supervisor Panel 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Press F1, select Tasks: Run Task, and Update Supervisor Panel.
```

8. Within the Dev Container enabled Visual Studio Code, select menu option Terminal->New Terminal, then run the command `sudo update-alternatives --set iptables /usr/sbin/iptables-legacy; sudo dockerd` to start the docker daemon within the Dev Container. 
9. Press F1, select Tasks: Run Task, and Run Supervisor.
10. Open Home Assistant Observer at [http://localhost:4357/](http://localhost:4357/) to monitor the startup process after the Supervisor container is started.
11. Open Home Assistant at [http://localhost:9123/](http://localhost:9123/) to begin testing of Home Assistant and the Supervisor.

At this point, you can press F5 to begin debugging. Try setting a line break within `supervisor/addons/utils.py` and then visit Home Assistant Supervisor Addon Store pages to verify proper operation.  

> :::info
> If you chose to place your source outside of WSL within Windows, be aware that you cannot open it with the File Chooser without sacrificing your dev container.  In order to access a windows folder, you must type a folder name using this format `/mnt/<drive>/path-to/project`. eg. `C:\Users\example\project` becomes `/mnt/c/Users/example/project`.
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::info
If you chose to place your source outside of WSL within Windows, be aware that you cannot open it with the File Chooser without sacrificing your dev container. In order to access a windows folder, you must type a folder name using this format `/mnt/<drive>/path-to/project`. For example, `C:\Users\example\project` becomes `/mnt/c/Users/example/project`.
:::
```
